Plasma Youth Sports Games
with Unsuccess of the champion,
would like to thank Slaven Bilić
for stepping in as the host.
Bilić is one of the first sponsors,
ambassador and is our biggest promoter.
He used his life and sports experience
in order to prepare high-quality content
with his guests for all generations.
Thanks, Nane!
Thank you on behalf
of all of us for taking the time.
Many years have passed since you,
I don't want to say, left or abandoned us.
Since you retired. -Yes.
In a very simple way, without
fanfare and without pomp.
On the other hand, there was something
mystical and inexplicable in all that.
We all wondered, what happened?
What are you doing now?
-Most of the time I’m a mom.
You’re mostly a mom?
-Yes, that’s right.
I thank God that I have the privilege
to devote my time to them.
Since I’ve completed
a large part of my career.
I occasionally do some projects,
but I’m not busy all day anymore.
I don’t have to sit in an office,
and I have that freedom of movement.
I believe that upbringing is very
important for children.
They need their mother the most.
Their upbringing is very important,
so I can afford to devote
myself fully to them.
Speaking of upbringing,
are you more...
At least in theory, it’s said
that the father is a "gypsum"
and the mother is the mom.
How do you treat them,
like a "gypsum" or like a mom?
I act more like a mom.
I don’t know exactly what is
meant by the term "gypsum".
However, as far as the role
of the father is concerned,
it was decisive, at least for me.
-Yes. I read somewhere...
I thought they called the father
"gypsum" because he is strict,
referring to a conservative
upbringing, which is fine for me.
However, that’s not true.
They called him that
because of the fractures.
Yes, even as a child growing up
when there was much more
freedom than today, he climbed trees
a lot and was mischievous. -All right.
Let’s reminisce a bit about the past.
I don’t want to ask you
if you miss skiing,
knowing that it’s been a long time.
However, can you remember
the time when you retired.
At least for the first
few years or months.
Did you miss skiing or
did you ever regret it? -No.
Did you feel emptiness
or relief? Or maybe both?
I never thought...
-You just stopped? -Yes.
That’s how you understood
that decision, but I didn’t.
At the beginning of my last season,
I knew that I wouldn’t
engage in skiing professionally again.
I thought it was my personal
decision, not someone else’s.
I’m a person who doesn’t like
to talk too much,
especially not about
my own goals.
I think then people
take a lot of energy from you.
I wanted to do it my way.
Because when someone knows what
will happen at the end of the season,
then they ask you about it
in every interview:
"This is one of your last races.
How will you deal with it?"
I think it’s unnecessary.
I just wanted to enjoy this ski season
as I enjoyed the previous ones.
I set myself some goals that
I wanted to achieve that season.
And I succeeded.
Thank God, and with a little luck.
That’s how it happened,
and it happened suddenly.
Only I knew about it.
Literally, no one but me.
Nobody but you? -Not my brother,
not my dad, not my mom,
not my coach, not anyone.
-It was sudden for us.
Because there were two
things involved. First...
That saying: "You should retire
at the peak of your fame."
It sounds good in theory, but hardly
any athletes actually do it.
They usually get "pushed away"
by the audience or the media, or...
I mean in team sports -
you don’t get a contract.
Rarely does one retire
at the peak, but you did.
When you were at the peak
of your career, and still young.
You were only 24. -Some people
are just starting at that age.
That’s right. There was no reason,
and then suddenly, I stopped.
Okay, but I don’t understand...
That’s what you decided,
and then it’s okay.
I’m not just talking about
the race adrenaline here,
but also about the schedule.
You were an athlete used
to constant obligations.
Especially since it’s even more
demanding in individual sports
than in team sports.
It’s simply a sacrifice. -It’s not
a sacrifice, it’s an investment.
Investment, yes. However,
you have to make big sacrifices.
Especially in individual sports.
In my opinion, it’s perspective,
I don’t see any sacrifice in that.
I’m doing something I love
and I’m doing it well. -Right.
When I stopped doing professional
sports, it was difficult for me.
Tell me, who has the privilege
of doing what they love most?
True. However, you can’t dismiss
what all athletes go through.
There is a lot of sacrifice
in team sports.
And even more in individual ones,
especially yours,
the one we’re going to talk about.
What she had to endure
to achieve those results.
That’s commendable and admirable.
-It’s a matter of perspective.
When it comes to me...
I think I probably know
how to keep perspective.
Maybe because I know myself well,
so it’s easier for me.
I was never concerned with
what other people were doing.
Or with external factors
I couldn’t influence.
The only person I can influence is me.
That’s why I liked to deal
with myself and my thoughts.
And with how I could improve myself.
I have never compared myself
to anyone else.
And I never tried to copy
somebody else.
It’s hard to do - and maybe
you have to be born that way.
Or maybe work on yourself
to become like that.
I was lucky to be able to think
calmly and without pressure,
not burdening myself
with success or failure.
You also have a brother...
Athletes, when the time comes,
either stay in sport in some role
or continue in veteran leagues.
For example, Ivica - they start
doing thing with more adrenaline.
And you just withdrew.
Are you aware...
Just as you said,
you’re on the same side...
In the opinion of many, you’re the best,
and in mine, without a doubt,
an athlete from these areas.
For your quality, career, medals -
we all know your success, charisma.
But you achieved all that
in a special way.
You were always simple, smiling.
And doing that through a sport
that’s global, respected, and important.
You’re both a champion
and a girl next door.
Are you now, as a wife, mother, lady,
aware of what you have achieved?
It’s silly to say I’m not aware of it.
However, I think everything
was meant to happen that way.
I don’t think I’m better
or more special than anyone else.
We’re all people who chose to do
something, more or less successfully.
To me, success doesn’t make a person.
Whether it’s success in school,
work, sports, or anything else.
Our daily attitude toward people and
community makes us who we are.
And whether we’re more or less
successful, that’s fine or not.
It’s good to be successful,
but it’s not what matters most.
I don’t see anything extravagant
in what I’ve achieved.
As strange as that sounds.
I just enjoyed what I was doing.
I was happy to see people
happy because of what I did.
And that they went through
it all together with me.
I don’t like exaggerations.
-Of course, because you’re complete.
You’ve come full circle.
At the same time, you’re charismatic,
confident, and motivated.
You can say what you want,
but without those traits,
you wouldn’t have achieved
those results.
And on the other hand,
you’re modest,
simple, and you treat
ordinary things normally.
And that’s absolutely true.
What we’re talking about
is not exaggeration, but fact.
All right. -You achieved
that in a special way.
But in the future,
someone else will do it.
At that time, it was me
and I achieved success.
Likewise, someone will
break those records one day.
We’ll praise that person too.
We won’t overlook them.
How did you fall
in love with skiing?
We know your dad, Ante,
was an athlete and that he
was involved in athletics,
handball, and skiing.
I think he even played water polo.
In one game in France,
he scored all the goals.
That is, 24 of them.
After he wasn’t invited
to the Yugoslav national team,
he was disappointed and said
his children wouldn’t play team sports.
Did you see yourself
in another sport at first,
or was it just "poof",
straight into skiing?
I was just an ordinary kid who
only did sports in primary school.
My brother started skiing first...
I learned to ski when I was three,
but I actually never liked it.
Mostly because I was always cold
and because there was
so much equipment.
Later in my career that followed me,
having to carry around all that gear.
But honestly, in the beginning,
I didn’t like skiing.
When we went on family ski trips,
I would always find ways
to avoid skiing that day, like saying
I’d rather go sledding instead.
My brother was in a ski club
in Zagreb, and later,
since my dad was a handball coach
in Slovenia, in Celje,
we spent a year there and my brother
joined the local ski club.
But I still didn’t do any sports,
except P. E. at school.
When we moved back to Zagreb,
I was in the third grade,
I started playing handball.
Both my parents played handball,
so I guess it just made sense.
They said I was doing okay,
that I had a good sense for it,
but there were some things
about team sports that didn’t
make sense to me at all.
For example, you’ll know this from
football, the coach says:
we’re running this play,
let’s call it "XY", right?
And we start playing that play, but
at one point I see the goal is open,
I can shoot, so I stop the play
and shoot - and score!
And then the coach starts yelling
at me for not finishing the play.
And I ask, "Wait, is the goal here to
finish the play or to score a goal?"
I mean, it was just practice,
but we were apparently training
to run the play exactly as planned.
Or, for example, the goalkeeper would
say, "Don’t shoot that hard,"
or something like that... and there
was always some referee issue.
I could never deal with referees,
honestly. I don't know how you do it.
Like, you can't even
explain it to them.
No matter how much you try to,
it's still in vain.
It just didn't seem fair to me.
I actually started skiing
because my brother went to
summer conditioning training to
Bjelolasica with his ski club.
It was summer break, I didn’t have
anything better to do,
so I just went with them. I met the
ski team there, we became friends,
we were fooling around, pushing each
other to jump into the cold pool,
I even split my chin open. They were
all great kids, we got along well.
Then school started, autumn came,
I went back to school,
and Ivica went on his first ski trip
to Kaprun, in Austria, with the club.
And the people there were like,
"Where’s Freckles?",
I had a lot of freckles back then,
so that was my nickname,
"Where’s Freckles, where’s Freckles?"
So I said, fine, I’ll go.
I honestly didn’t have
a clue about skiing.
They put me in a group with all the
kids who already skied normally,
and I just kept falling and falling.
My dad got involved in skiing at that
time too, he worked with Ivica,
and he wasn't that serious with me.
He said it was better for me
to focus on school and handball.
There was even talk that
I might start playing tennis,
but that never really happened.
How old were you then?
-I was ten years old.
And then one coach, Ivo Drinjković,
he was the president of the club,
Dr. Ivo Drinjković, he said, "Come on,
kid, you come skiing with me,
forget about them,
let them do their thing..."
And somehow I picked
everything up really quickly,
and literally after a month
I was already going to competitions
with the rest of them.
Apparently, it came naturally to me
and that’s how it all started.
In every sport, parents sacrifice
a lot, give things up for their child...
Of course, that’s natural.
-Out of love, obviously. -Naturally.
Some do it more, some less, and
unfortunately not everyone succeeds.
Sometimes it just stops,
maybe the child loses motivation
or whatever, doesn’t matter. But we
know the ones who did make it, right,
and they’re the ones
people talk about.
Talking with Ivanišević, for example,
or with Đoković, both of whom were
guests on this show, I noticed that
your path and your development
are almost a copy-paste of theirs.
Because in all three cases, yours,
theirs, and Blanka Vlašić’s,
it’s about an individual sport
where the family...
Without the family’s support,
especially in systems and countries
like ours, or in this whole region
where things are not organized
or guaranteed, it’s impossible.
It’s almost identical,
with one big difference:
for them, tennis courts
or athletic tracks are something
they can walk or take the bus to.
But in your case, there’s no snow,
no conditions, nothing.
So was that a crazy idea of one man,
your father, who wanted
to prove to everyone:
"I’ll take the hardest sport there is
and show that it can be done."
It’s like that movie Cool Runnings...
-Cool Runnings, yes, exactly...
Except that was a film...
-And this was real life.
Yes, I know my dad competed for the
Yugoslav national team in skiing,
and I know he really, really loved it.
He used to tell all these stories
about going skiing with his friends,
how they’d take the train
to Kranjska Gora,
and that part of the country
was always full of snow.
All those adventures, everything
they had to go through just to get to
the slopes and actually ski,
I found that fascinating to listen to.
It was incredibly fun to hear
how much passion they had for it.
So in a way, I think that passion
of his just carried over.
Handball is a team sport,
that didn’t really stick,
then I think he also played some
water polo, and so on.
Back then people played
multiple sports.
It wasn’t like today, where
everything is strictly one thing.
You can’t really say it was less
serious, but now, with technology
and everything else,
the level of performance required
doesn’t even let you have a normal
life, let alone practice more sports.
So now, as a parent,
I don’t think I could have that same
strength or vision that he had.
Of course, everyone asks,
"Will your kids be skiers too?"
But come on,
let the kids just be kids.
Let them grow and develop
at their own pace.
That’s probably a topic in itself,
how people expect that
if someone was successful in sports,
then their children automatically have
to be Olympic or world champions too.
It usually doesn’t work that way.
-Well, I mean...
It doesn’t really matter
whether it does or not,
but if everyone keeps pushing that
idea... To go back to my dad...
I honestly don’t know what kind of
vision or strength he had in his mind.
He had my mom, his wife, and without
her, it would’ve been zero points.
All credit to him for everything, but
without mom... -Of course, of course.
Nothing without mom... -But tell me,
how did you actually got hooked?
Usually, when kids go into sports,
whether a team or individual sport,
they have idols. You know,
local or national heroes:
some want to be the next
Modrić, Boban, Bokšić, Džeko,
Dražen Petrović, Kukoč,
Divac, or Janica.
But with you - you didn’t...
And usually, you dream about it with
your friends, your neighborhood crew,
but was it even possible
to dream a dream that big,
the one you ended up living?
I mean, there’s no snow here...
Well, honestly, I never really
thought of my sport,
and this might sound silly,
I never took it seriously.
You couldn’t have taken it
more seriously than you did!
No, really, to me it was just play,
fun...
Everything was play,
fun, and adventure.
Right. So Ante was basically
Spielberg, and your mom too...
They once asked me, "At what point
did you know you wanted to ski?"
I never really thought about it,
it just kind of evolved naturally.
I enjoyed it because of
the kids in the club.
I liked spending time with them.
That’s why I skied, for the company,
the fun, the friends.
I mean, I guess... I look at my son
now and he’s more interested in
playing and hanging out with friends
than in being good at something.
Right. -And it just went
naturally from there.
I was lucky that I was good at it. I
went to those children’s competitions.
Imagine being 12 years old and going
to Italy, France, meeting new people,
kids from America, Canada, Japan...
For me, that was all wow.
That was the fun part,
everything else was secondary.
I get that, but still... -And then that
thing slowly became more serious.
When I moved into adult skiing, for
us, that’s when you start FIS races,
I was 16 when when I started that...
And suddenly you realize,
"Okay, this is serious."
I’d look around and see everyone
so serious, so I thought,
"I guess I have to be serious too."
But then I’d ask myself:
"Why should I?"
Somehow, for me,
it alwas like a game.
I enjoyed every day, whatever
we were doing, training or otherwise,
I just kept trying to challenge
myself through it all.
I get it, and that’s what
I wanted to ask you.
Even though it’s not
often portrayed that way.
You once said you never felt like you
didn’t have money. -Yes. -Right? -Yes.
But on the other hand, when we watch
the film or read about it, it’s clear,
you were out there camping,
living almost like Robinson Crusoe.
You’d be on Mljet, and okay,
that’s fine because it’s summer,
but then winter comes, and it’s a
Russian Lada, 12 years old...
The legend - that Russian Lada...
Right? You drive to Austria,
you sleep... It wasn’t ideal.
No, it wasn’t ideal.
-You didn’t stay in hotels.
And since skiing is a morning sport
anyway, you’d go early,
before anyone else was there, so that
no one would see you on the slopes,
because you’d have to pay
them otherwise.
These are the kinds of things that,
for a child, might seem okay,
but in reality, they’re tough.
-Not really, because as a child,
you don’t have that perception
of how the world is supposed to work.
You only know what you know.
I mean, I was aware that when
we went to children’s races like
Topolino or Pinocchio,
we’d stay in hotels.
But then, say,
when we’d go to Austria,
my dad would have enough money
for the ski pass, but not for a hotel.
I’d sleep in the car, and the two of
them would sleep outside somewhere,
or make some kind of... I mean, we
didn’t sleep in tents, not exactly,
but they’d make a small bivouac,
hide somewhere, and that’s how it was.
To me, it was all kind of cool.
I found it fun.
That's absolutely understandable.
-And I enjoyed it.
Your brother's here, Ante and mom.
You're all in this, all all-in.
You're all holding one pole, and
you all want the same outcome.
Ivanišević has a sister
with her own needs,
Đoković has two brothers, Ančić has...
-Everyone's got something.
There's a bit of everything.
And you're all...
I understand your role.
And Ivica’s and Ante's, of course.
What did mom do?
-Mom did everything.
Everything moms do.
Dad was the coach, of course.
You drive 12 hours to France by car.
Prepares skis - he handled the "guy stuff".
Mom did everything else.
Copying school materials.
Back then, you couldn't just
see what was done online.
You take a notebook and write.
She travelled with us.
When we got a bit better financially,
we stayed in apartments.
We didn't sleep in hotels,
and she would cook for us.
She was there with us,
taking care of everything.
Basically, logistics. Without her,
things just wouldn't work.
When did you attend school regularly?
-Until high school. -Until high school.
Until high school, then I did
correspondence school. -Yes, yes.
Unfortunately, here you can't really...
Especially not with skiing.
If you play basketball, handball,
or some other sport,
you go to the gym and come back.
-You're home. -Maybe on weekends.
But skiing... I'd be gone a week,
a whole month sometimes.
So that's a bit tricky.
It's a shame we don't
have something like...
That's called the American system.
You can do both at the same time.
One doesn't work without the other.
If you're not good in sports, you can't
really function normally... I mean, you can,
in school, but it helps a lot
if you're good in sports.
If you're bad in school,
they even cut your sports.
They tried that in our
sports high schools.
There's still a sports high school.
-It's a bit rigid. -Not the same system.
Still rigid. -You can go to
tournaments, but mostly be in school.
But okay, that’s how it is.
Tell me...
That's mother Marica.
About Ante... We know about dad, of course,
but his methods were sometimes called
extreme, harsh, even inhuman.
They criticized him - how can you
do that to your kids?
Quite the opposite. You can only do that
to your own kids, because you want the best.
Only with them can you do it.
How do you remember that?
Those Spartan trainings. Again,
copy-paste from Joško Vlašić,
from Ivanišević's father.
So that's kind of the standard here.
Ante’s sessions were,
somehow, brutally hard.
Again, it’s a matter of perspective.
I don’t think that, watching others
train, I would’ve quit skiing
even if I had to train that way.
It’s monotonous and boring,
and every day the same. Literally.
Every training with dad was fun.
It was never the same.
I was never bored training.
We always trained outdoors,
which I loved. Gymnastics and
similar stuff we did later,
at the Faculty of Kinesiology.
But outside, where
every step is different.
If I had to go to the gym
and lift weights all the time,
same movement, same environment,
stuffy space - not fun at all.
Boring to the limits.
-To you it was an adventure.
I was having fun. Even now
I love jumping from high cliffs.
I love it. Some find it
extreme. To me,
it’s extreme to sit eight hours
in an office.
Early mornings? -Sorry?
-Getting up early?
Now it’s a problem.
Back then it wasn’t.
Because I went to bed
on time, you know.
So... my character isn’t
the easiest to work with
for coaches, I have my own
views and visions.
I know myself - what I can do
and how. Some things I see
just wouldn’t suit me,
so I don’t want to do them.
That’s hard when you have a coach,
unless it’s your dad and coach.
He’s still my dad, he won’t send me...
-And you trust him, of course. -Yes.
He can handle all my quirks.
A strict coach would send you home,
you’d get punished, or whatever.
I was never punished. Never.
That’s what was cool with dad.
He’d say: do ten sit-ups.
Whatever. He never counted
what or how you did it.
He’d think, correct you sometimes.
He always let us draw
our own conclusions,
then he’d explain.
Janičko, that’s what he calls me.
"Look, if I tell you to do ten of something,
whether you do nine or twelve,
that’s up to you.
You’re doing it for yourself,
not for me.
If you do nine, you’re cheating
yourself, not me."
Responsibility, yes. -You must
learn responsibility for that.
Sometimes I did nine, I admit.
What was great with him -
trainings were specific.
Hard, but fun. Except in summer,
when it was unbearably hot.
That’s when training was worst,
but that’s the climate.
-You said you did nine.
Sorry to interrupt. Did you ever
do twelve? Or not your type? -What?
Sit-ups. -No, I didn’t. -You said
you did nine... -Ivica’s that type.
My brother is, I’m not. Rarely.
-It pushes you subconsciously.
Rarely. Since I was a kid,
I’ve always thought about
when I perform an exercise,
how much strength I need,
how to do it well, fast, right,
and save energy. Efficiency -
that was my main goal.
To make my movement efficient.
At the highest level,
but never wasting energy.
There might come a moment
when you’ll need that energy.
If you waste it before that,
neither your mind nor body works.
That’s the Dalmatian in you.
Exactly as much as needed.
Maybe a bit...
You’ve mentioned him a few times -
the thing that sets you apart.
That’s Ivica, your older brother.
He said you pushed each other,
helped each other.
It was simply a shared success.
Your success was his, and his yours.
Was there any jealousy -
not negative, but competitive?
To be better than him and all that?
-Of course.
I was really lucky
that he’s older than me
and that we do the same sport.
For much of my childhood,
skiing in kids’ categories,
since he started earlier
in adult FIS competitions,
I was always with him,
and he was always with men.
He trained with them, too.
So I had the privilege
to train with them as well,
to compare myself to them.
He was like my pacer. -Yeah, yeah.
-Like in athletics, someone ahead of you.
That worked for him too. Whenever
I started catching up to him,
when he saw it got serious,
he’d tighten up.
"No way a girl passes me."
It was funny. But definitely
we were a "push and pull" team.
It was great for me because...
I was for a long time a forerunner -
the one who skis before racers.
There are three who clear the track,
check that everything’s fine,
and all that.
I think that period gave me a lot.
When he moved into more
serious skiing,
I was still in junior categories.
Always with him,
always watching the guys ski.
I tried to get as close to them as I could.
Not fully possible,
but within limits, yes.
That was a really good
period for me.
For him, less so -
having me as a sister
and being together
was more for me than for him.
Maybe I misunderstood -
correct me if I’m wrong.
When both you and he competed,
you were much more successful.
You even once said
one reason you retired
was so your father could focus
entirely on him,
since your dad traveled with you.
-Exactly. -Right?
That’s how it ended up.
When you retired,
he exploded. Was that because
your dad, as the authority,
was now with him -
and also the pressure he felt
from the nation’s expectations?
Like, "Your sister wins everything,
now it’s your turn."
That’s heavy to carry.
I’ve built a theory
that he pushed you a bit,
and you held him back a bit.
Even with the same training,
you can’t get the same results
in men’s and women’s skiing.
Because you’re not the same person.
In character, he and I
are very different. -How?
He’s a devoted missionary type.
He sees only skiing.
Sure, he plays guitar,
has many interests.
But his focus is extremely...
In my view, overloaded
with things he can’t control.
And a lot of things really get to him.
I think that when you
focus too much on something,
you actually end up
holding yourself back.
I was always much more relaxed about it.
For me, it was more like,
"Great, the Olympics are coming up!"
It is great, and I’m happy about it,
but at the end of the day, it’s just a race.
If not these Olympics,  then there’ll
be new ones in four years.
Sure, it’s a long wait, but that’s life.
There are worse things. Much worse.
You get in a car, crash, and that’s it.
So, all of this is just part of life.
Everything, really everything,
can be simple.
It doesn’t matter
what others say or think.
Once, I finished a race in eighth place,
and I was over the moon.
I mean, completely happy,
like I’d just won an Olympic gold medal.
Because I’d been through a tough period.
I was coming back from an injury,
and things just weren’t going well.
One race went kind of okay.
It was a giant slalom...
And I thought, "Great, I did it after all.
There’s still something I need to fix..."
In that moment, I was really happy.
I could see that I’d reached
a certain level of consistency,
that I had stability, so from there,
I could start building and improving,
slowly and steadily. But then, when I talked
to my dad and the other coaches,
they said it was a disaster. And I thought,
"Come on, people, I finished eighth!
I haven’t been eighth in a long time..."
Be happy for me, because I’m happy.
I’m satisfied. And that has
to count for something.
It means I still have motivation.
I didn’t want to hear things like,
"You didn’t do this right, you didn’t do that,
why this, why that?"
I thought, "Just let me be happy with
finishing eighth, even if it’s not perfect."
But at that moment,
that was the best I could do.
That doesn’t mean...
Things got better later on.
But people can really kill your motivation
with some of those unnecessary comments.
And if you can’t, yourself,
see how much you’re worth,
how capable you are,
then it just  sweeps you away,
like a flood, and you sink. And no one
even notices. Everyone just wonders why.
Because people don’t allow you
to make mistakes. They don’t forgive you.
But why? I mean, in the end,
who are these people, anyway?
It might sound a bit silly,
but you have to protect yourself.
That’s right. -You have to know
how to protect yourself.
That’s a great state of mind.
Alright, you approached it all playfully.
Perfect, that’s it. -For me, that’s good.
But when did you feel, when did you realize,
that you were better than your peers?
I never thought I was better.
Wait... your success didn’t
just come out of nowhere.
You... I actually prepared for this
conversation. -Alright, okay, sorry.
You won both Topolino and Pinocchio...
So how can you say you weren’t better?
Not better as a person, but a better skier.
I mean, in your last year,
your final season of children’s skiing,
out of 22 races, like your father,
when he scored 24 goals, you won all 22.
That means you were better.
-But that’s children’s skiing.
It has nothing to do
with what comes later.
But those kids go on
to higher levels... -No, no.
Children’s skiing is very deceptive.
And there is a difference,
or at least, there used to be.
I don’t really follow it
that closely anymore,
so I’m not sure
if it’s still the same today.
But back when I was a kid, at those races
Topolino, Pinocchio, La Scara
all those children’s
competitions and categories,
it turned out that the girls who were
successful in those events
usually went on to be successful
in adult skiing too.
While the boys, who were great
at those same races,
often didn’t do as well later on.
And why such a big difference?
Because, if you have two
fourteen-year-old boys
one is already shaving, and the other
doesn’t even know what a razor is.
That’s just a natural thing
you can’t make up for,
because the first one
has already grown into a man.
With girls, that difference
isn’t as noticeable.
In skiing, at that time, the girls
who were good at those competitions,
like Tina Maze from Slovenia,
who’s a year younger than me,
we used to ski together all the time.
And she was also successful
in those competitions.
So it turns out that those
who do well in these events
in women’s skiing, tend to be successful
in adult skiing too, as long as
they don’t suffer a major injury.
-Well, you develop earlier than we do.
With us, those adolescent differences
are more noticeable. One is shaving...
Yes, the differences are bigger.
Some develop earlier, some later.
And a lot depends on when someone
hits their growth spurt in youth sports.
Generally, at least in other sports,
and maybe it’s the same in skiing,
those who "develop late,"
once they catch up,
often become dominant. -Yes.
When they get their muscles
and fully grow. So this interests me.
An athlete’s career is long,
but we all have moments that, at times,
either launch you forward
and give you confidence,
which you later use to your advantage...
Or, in other cases,
they might slow you down...
Did you have any turning points
in your career?
No, because I’d remember them.
So winning Topolino
didn’t really mean to you
that you were "the one" to go further?
-No. You know what my goal was?
For example, in Andorra,
there was a competition
where the winner would get
a Chupa Chups lollipop,
weighing as much as you weigh.
They put you on the scale, I’m there,
the Chupa Chups are there, you get it?
That was amazing to me.
I wasn’t interested in the medal I got.
I cared about coming home,
back to my school,
bringing those lollipops,
and all the kids getting to enjoy them.
That’s what motivated me. Later,
it was also amazing in Levi, Finland,
where a few years ago they started
giving a reindeer as a prize.
That didn’t exist when I was skiing.
I find those kinds of things fun.
And then I told my brother
to compete, but unfortunately
he came in second, didn’t win.
So, we didn’t get the reindeer after all.
Those kinds of things motivate me.
Not everyone is going to say
"Wow, you’re amazing, you were the best."
Your father didn’t push that either? -No.
I’ve always been my own person. -Bravo.
Alright, but even though
you’re your own person,
you grow, and in January 1999,
you take first place,
that’s your first win
in the combined event, right?
Yes. In St. Anton.
And your progress shot upwards quickly.
However, in December of the same year,
during downhill training, right?
In St. Moritz, there was a fall, a break,
you fell into the net
and tore four or five ligaments.
You needed knee reconstruction,
and the whole process in Selce
took a long time.
Although the recovery was supposed
to take nine to twelve months,
you were back on skis
after 52 days, right?
Do you see that you had some
incredible willpower?
What does a kid know?
You just take it and do it.
I didn’t know anything about it.
The people around you were terrified,
you see their faces and think: "Okay,
I broke my leg, it hurts, but it’s fine.
Recovery is happening,
you try to lift your leg,
you lift weights, and so on...
People make too big a deal
out of absolutely everything in life.
Of course, it’s not great
that you’re injured,
but it happened, and you have a goal,
to get back, and that’s it.
There’s not much mystery
or philosophy in it.
During the time you can’t ski,
can’t do what you love most,
you do something else, spend time
with friends, read books, go for walks.
You do what makes you happy.
Otherwise, you don’t have time for it,
but now you do.
And then you make the most of it.
Because you’ll definitely return to skiing,
and on the third day there will be fog,
the wind will blow at 100 km/h,
and you’ll wonder:
"Why did I even come back,
when I was perfectly fine over there?"
So it’s all just a natural process.
You just have to accept what comes
your way, whether it’s good or bad.
Don’t elevate the good too much,
and don’t drag the bad even lower.
And that’s it.
It’s the same as when you read a book
about how to stay balanced,
how to handle this,
how to handle that...
But it’s not that easy to actually
put it into practice and live that way.
You have to be practical for yourself.
-Yes, you do, but it’s not easy.
And you also need to...
Alright, you’ll put it in perspective,
but the numbers don’t lie.
It’s an incredible career, marked
by numerous medals and achievements.
But also surgeries.
You had twelve surgeries, right?
I had more, but that’s okay...
Knee, appendix, thyroid...
-It’s tough... -Is that normal?
Do other female skiers usually have
that many surgeries, or not?
Some have more, some have fewer.
But everyone has certain issues.
It’s rare to find a skier, male or female,
who hasn’t been injured.
For example, Tina Maze from Slovenia.
She competed in all four disciplines
and actually never had a serious injury.
She told me, when we spoke:
"Janica, at least you were injured.
You had time to rest your mind."
She, season after season,
always had the same rhythm.
She never had time
to completely step away from it all.
And people get tired. I thought:
"Yeah, actually, you’re right,
because no matter how much
you love something,
when you repeat it every single day,
it becomes monotonous, boring,
and everything just stretches out.
But in this case, you get back
that spark for competition,
that feeling that had faded,
because naturally it would fade.
It’s hard to maintain constant excitement,
to always be hyped up. -Bravo.
So, as negative as it may seem,
because there are consequences,
it hurts, all of that,
you also get that spark back,
like you’ve never skied before.
That’s great.
That’s basically what your coach,
doctor, physiotherapist...
are telling you, to find
something positive in every situation.
But as an athlete, you’re the one
actually experiencing it,
and when it happens, it feels terrible.
And they try to encourage you:
"Now you can read a book,
we can work on these other parts
of your body..." -Yes, yes.
And all you really want to say is:
"Okay, just leave me alone..."
You’re missing that "mindset" of yours,
as they say in Zagreb.
But we can't deny the three big globes,
seven small ones, three slaloms,
four combinations...
-Have you learned it all? -Yes.
Five-time world champion.
Eight times Croatia’s
Sportswoman of the Year.
The first skier to be ranked
in world sports as no. 1.
And six Olympic medals: four gold and
two silver in Salt Lake City and Torino.
Which races, if we ignore snobs,
chupa chups and medals,
were really special to you?
Special?
A race you’d repeat if you could,
because it wasn’t great?
I don’t think that way, "what if..."
That’s wasting time on something
you can’t change.
You should think about the things
you can change.
One medal was special to me
and it was in giant slalom,
at the Olympic Games.
That was the last race.
I was very exhausted.
Both mentally and physically.
More mentally than physically.
At those Olympic Games, I learned
something I didn’t think existed,
that a person can no longer be happy.
You know when you have those
great successes of yours?
You play one match and you’re good,
then another and win a medal,
then a third medal...
It’s such an amount of happy emotion
that it’s terribly exhausting.
It’s impossible to be happy all the time.
I was emotionally empty.
If Michael Jackson or Elvis Presley,
who aren’t alive, had walked past me,
I wouldn’t have looked back.
I was extremely exhausted.
I remember coming to a restaurant
before the race to have some tea.
I was lying on a bench and thought,
"I can’t go on anymore."
My dad said, "Janička, that’s great!
That’s excellent! It means you’re empty.
That’s great!" And I thought,
"What is he talking about?"
I still had two runs left,
and I knew I wouldn’t move
from that spot until two
or three in the afternoon.
I just didn’t feel like it.
I was emotionally exhausted.
I had to check the time to see
when the start was. So I went.
It was actually kind of funny.
I got there, and my serviceman,
a Slovenian, Jure Hafner, was there.
The woman before me went out, but
I wasn’t paying attention to who it was
or if she had already finished.
I was simply uninterested in life.
I stood there in front of the starting
gate and someone took off before me.
I asked Hef what he thought
about me just going back instead.
I already had three medals,
and in giant slalom
I wasn’t anything special.
What would happen if I
just went back, you know?
He said, "Jana, why are you saying
such nonsense?"
"Alright," I said, "I have to go!"
I wasn’t thinking at all about
how the course was set up.
I was just... empty.
I put my poles across the timing
device and lowered my head.
I thought, "I have to go now.
I can’t turn back,
that would look stupid."
So I pushed off and skied brilliantly.
In the end, my dad was right. He said
it was good that I was drained,
because that way, no emotion
could touch me or stop me.
I realized that when your mind
is overloaded with thoughts,
your body stops listening.
Your body listens best when,
after a million repetitions,
everything becomes automatic,
like a VHS tape playing on loop.
It runs on its own and
music plays in your head.
You don’t have to think about anything.
That’s a wonderful thing.
It just takes a lot of repetition
to reach that state.
But you kept winning all the time?
Not exactly, actually,
it was every other season.
One year I was injured,
the next I was skiing again.
Then another year I had problems
with my thyroid...
But when you did ski,
you were always at the top.
Not really. Half of every season
I was stagnating due to injuries.
That happens even to people
who are the complete opposite of you,
those who are never satisfied,
no matter how successful they are.
"It’s not enough, I can do better..."
But where does that lead?
That’s something you can only
say to yourself.
I’d come to the course,
and a coach would say,
"The course is set perfectly for you."
What does that even mean,
"set perfectly for me"?
As if some turns suit me
better than others?
No. There’s no course
that’s made just for me.
Even when my dad set the course,
it wasn’t "made for me."
It can’t be.
That would be too simplistic,
too uncreative to think that way.
The playing field is never
exactly the same.
It’s always different.
Just like Đokovic says,
there’s no such thing as a perfect shot.
Not a perfect match,
not a perfect shot. Why is that?
Because it’s like chasing the Holy Grail.
That’s what keeps you motivated,
to become even better.
You, clearly, aren’t like that.
I sometimes think about whether
I could’ve done certain things better.
Did you ever have a perfect race?
There’s no such thing as a perfect race.
Just like there’s no perfect shot.
It’s impossible. Nothing in life is perfect.
What I loved about slalom,
as a discipline, were the sounds.
Because when you hit the gates,
they make this specific sound,
they give you rhythm.
What amused me was that as I
skied down a particular course,
I’d listen to what kind of sound
the pole would make,
if I hit it a little higher
or a little lower.
What position would my body be in
if I moved my finger like this?
How would my back react?
How would my legs react?
Do you do that during training
or in a race?
During training, not in a race.
In a race, my mind is on other things.
But in training... that sound,
that’s really cool.
"Let’s repeat that one!"
And then you try to repeat it.
With every tiny movement in your body,
every blink of an eye,
your body reacts to it all.
It’s the brain that’s in control.
Your legs don’t move by themselves.
Everything starts from up here.
It matters whether your arm
is like this or like that.
The force won’t transfer the same way
to your skis, or to your legs, back, arms.
All of that is so important.
And working on it all the time,
that’s the fun part.
Fun? -Yes, constant fun.
It’s not hard, it’s not like
running a marathon.
It’s never the same,
it’s different, and it’s playful.
Some people told me that it’s
not quite the same in skiing,
but it is, just like in most individual
sports, the Olympics are the Olympics.
Even in skiing? -Yes, in skiing too.
Ronaldo, Đokovic,
Nadal, Ferrer, Hamilton...
Who was your biggest rival?
That Swedish skier?
You mean when I was still competing?
-Yes. -Anja Pärson was my biggest rival.
Because we both competed
in all four disciplines.
That doesn’t really exist anymore,
today it’s much more specialized.
Is there friendship in that,
or mostly rivalry?
On the course, it’s rivalry.
I think people often push the idea that
athletes hate each other too much.
During a race or a match,
you do kind of hate each other,
it sounds silly, but at the same time,
you respect each other completely.
You respect that person and you know
exactly what they’ve gone through.
But I don’t ski against her.
I ski against everyone,
mostly against myself.
My motivation was never to beat her.
Because to beat her, I’d have to beat
everyone else anyway,
no matter how strong
or weak they were.
Outside of that, Tina Maze
is the only person
I still occasionally keep in touch with.
With social media, it’s easy
to stay connected.
We’re quite different by nature.
She’s very passionate,
she shows her emotions openly.
When she’s upset,
she’ll break a ski pole.
I, on the other hand, won’t do anything
when I’m unhappy.
I’ll know that my skiing
wasn’t good that day,
but I won’t let it frustrate me.
-One last question...
Do you ever regret not winning
the Snow Queen Trophy?
I feel sorry, but because of the people.
Whether I’d won one more
World Cup race or not,
that didn’t matter much to me.
What hurt was knowing that people
didn’t get what they truly deserved.
That’s what felt unfair to me.
That’s all for this part of our
conversation with Janica Kostelić.
You’ll be able to watch the second part
in two weeks, on Arena Sport 1.